---
layout: post
title: Ultra-Scale Playbook vol-3 - DeepSpeed ZeRO 
date: 2025-09-07
description: On the three kinds of ZeRO used with Data Parallelism 
tags: ml
categories: scaling
featured: false
---

## Zero Redundancy Optimiser
TLDR: Instead of naive data parallelism, 
- partition the optimizer states, gradients, and parameters across the DP dimension,
- while still allowing computation with the full parameter set.
Can require more communnication between DP ranks (think: overlapping).

### 3 stages of ZeRO
1. ZeRO-1: only partition optimiser states
2. ZeRO-2: partition optimiser states + gradients
3. ZeRO-3: partition optimiser states + gradients + params
   
Given the model parameter count $N$, mixed precision training with Adam dictates the following memory usage:
- params `bf16` = $2N$
- grads `bf16` = $2N$, if we want to accumulate grad in `fp32` then $4N$
- optimiser states `fp32` = $4N + 4N$, and parameters `fp32` = $4N$

For efficiency let's keep grad-accumulation in `bf16` and so total memory usage becomes $2N + 2N + 12N$. Now given data parallel degree $N_d$,
- **Baseline:** $2N + 2N + 12N$ across each DP rank
- **ZeRO-1:** $2N + 2N + 12N/N_d$
- **ZeRO-2:** $2N + (2N + 12N)/N_d$
- **ZeRO-3:** $(2N + 2N + 12N)/N_d$

### ZeRO-1: only shard optimiser states
- Each DP rank forward passes with the same full set of `bf16` params but on a different microbatch of data.
- Each DP rank back-props with the same full set of `bf16` grads but on a different microbatch of data.
- Since each DP rank stores only $1/N_d$ of the optimiser states, and we want to back-prop on all the data via a mean/sum reduction, we perform a `reduce_scatter` on the gradients, i.e., $grad_k^j \leftarrow \sum_l grad^j_l$. This accumulates the gradient of each $N/N_d$-th parameter chunk on all the data $\equiv \nabla_w \ell(X) = \sum_{i=1}^n \nabla_w \ell(X_i)$.
- Now that we have each $N/N_d$-th parameter chunk accumulated across the data, we perform an optimiser step using only $1/N_d$ states $\implies$ $1/N_d$ `fp32` updated params, converted to $1/N_d$ `bf16` params.
- At this point, each DP rank has $1/N_d$ updated `bf16` params. It now receives the other $(N_d-1)/N_d$ fraction of params from the other DP ranks via an `all_gather` operation.
- Now each DP rank has the same full set of updated `bf16` params, ready for the next step of training.
- Final memory footprint: $2N + 2N + 12N / N_d$.

💡 To update each chunk during `reduce_scatter`, only that chunk (across different microbatches) is needed per machine. 

**What motivates ZeRO-2:** Why not accumulate a chunk on all data during back-prop, and then only store the grads required for the optimiser step? That eliminates the need to always store all the grads. 
### ZeRO-2: shard optimiser states + grad
Only perform `reduce_scatter` during back-prop. Now only $1/N_d$-th of the gradients are needed in memory, freeing up memory and giving us a much better memory footprint of $2N + (2N + 12N)/N_d$.

**What motivates ZeRO-3:** Distributing the params across DP ranks can make forward pass possible by doing an `all_gather` for each microbatch per DP rank. Think of it this way: we temporarily "stitch" all the shards of a layer together, forward pass a microbatch through it, then flush the gathered shards to keep only $1/N_d$ params in memory.

### ZeRO-3: shard everything
- **Forward pass:** distribute the `bf16` param set across DP ranks $\implies$ $2N / N_d$ memory on each rank. Given a microbatch, use `all_gather` to stitch a sharded layer together, apply the layer on the microbatch, and flush the other gathered param shards from memory.
- **Back-prop:** use `all_gather` to stitch sharded params together, compute gradient for gathered params per microbatch, and then `reduce_scatter` to accumulate all microbatches into each chunk.
- Final memory footprint: $(2N + 2N + 12N)/N_d$.

💡 ZeRO-3 requires $2 \cdot \text{num\_layers} -1$ additional calls to `all_gather` w.r.t ZeRO-2, and each comes with a small base latency. Also, we gather all the shards once in the forward pass and once during back-prop, incurring a communication tax of $N$ each time. Adding another communication tax of $N$ from the `reduce_scatter` called during back-prop, our total communication cost is $3N$ compared to $2N$ in ZeRO-2.

💡 While this may seem like a lot of overhead due to communication, in practice we use *prefetching* to compensate for this: simply `all_gather` weights for the next layer when we forward pass through the current layer. Similarly, `all_gather` weights of the previous layer while back-propping through the current layer. 

**When will this fail:** when our DP dimension exceeds 512, the communication overhead will become too large due to *ring latency*, and our overlap will fail. Need to think of something else at those scales.
